Apropos Debian "Bookworm" (SID/Testing as of early 2023).

In response to pressing the "ALSA MIDI Beep" button, a dialogue box should be
presented containing the names of the output devices. My experience is that
this works properly for both a USB-connected hardware MIDI device ("MD100")
or for QSynth (a FluidSynth GUI), but not for the Brighton/Bristol synthesiser
emulator.

To get Brighton/Bristol working, execute QJackCtl: this might or might not
start the Jack daemon automatically and might or might not have patchbay
persistence ("not" is assumed in both cases for the remainder of this note).

Press "Start" to run the Jack daemon, then run the synthesiser emulator as
packaged by Debian:

$ startBristol -pro10 -midi seq

Now use QJackCtl's Graph window to make connections from the Bristol object's
"out_left" and "out_right" ports to the system object's "playback_1" and
"playback_2" ports.

Test that the keyboard on the GUI portion of the synthesiser emulator (i.e.
"Brighton") works properly, then that the "ALSA MIDI Beep" button has the
expected effect.

-----

I don't remember having anything like this degree of difficulty getting things
going with older Debian releases, I'm pretty sure that this is something to do
with the introduction of Jack for PCM (if not MIDI) routing.

-----

TO BE DONE: Investigate the extent to which the GUI can be controlled by
messages from a physical controller. The objective is to be able to map the
drawbars etc. on an input-only controller to GUI controls, with an effect
determined by which synthesiser is being emulated.

This from cira 2006:

"Here is the lowdown on MIDI in bristol. The GUI and the engine are separate
processes. They speak SYSEX messages to adjust the parameters, and the
keyboard sends NOTE events - all across a TCP socket primarily from GUI to
engine (there are some acknowledgements). Separately the engine listens, per
default, to the ALSA SEQ or raw MIDI interface for MIDI events. It only
supports the following: NOTE ON/OFF, CONTINUOUS 0 and 1 for pitch and mod
wheels, and the memory moog should respond to controllers 7 and 11 for two
foot pedals - expression and volume.

"I was not sure whether to implement the sustain pedal. Most master keyboards
will use this to control sending note off events for sustain, so bristol
then does not have too.

"Now when it comes to controlling parameters, this is a GUI function. The GUI
will have to register to receive MIDI events as well as the engine, change
its potentiometer settings and then tell the engine to adjust its
operational parameters. Also for program change events it is the GUI that
has memories, not the engine. In my opinion this is the correct approach,
but it introduces a couple of issues regarding controller manipulation.
Either way controls will be implemented and I will maintain an option for
tracking the keyboard in the GUI for the reasons you state."

https://linux-audio-user.linuxaudio.narkive.com/UeWsCBGs/ann-bristol-0-9-5-60

Also the discussion at https://sourceforge.net/p/bristol/discussion/529491/thread/10fac094/

As of 2023 I think the brightonControllers.c file is relevant, noting that it
appears to describe control messages parsed from stdin rather than from the
MIDI input.

If I connect a MIDI keyboard via USB and check the ALSA (as distinct from Jack)
sequencer (i.e. MIDI) devices:

$ aconnect -l
...
client 24: 'Keystation Pro 88' [type=kernel,card=2]
    0 'Keystation Pro 88 MIDI 1'
    1 'Keystation Pro 88 MIDI 2'
...
    client 130: 'bristol' [type=user,pid=528714]
    0 'bristol input   '

Then set up connections using

$ aconnect 24:0 130:0
$ aconnect 24:1 130:0

I can confirm that the notes, pitchbend and modulation from the keyboard
appear to have useful effect, although there is no feedback from the GUI.

I don't think that, realistically, I'm going to get any further forward with
Brighton/Bristol here: at least without doing a substantial amount of work on
their sourcecode myself.

Subject to setting up the connection explicitly using aconnect, I can confirm
that a keyboard can send program (i.e. instrument) changes to an attached MIDI
sound generator. Many controller-only keyboards (i.e. without an internal sound
generator etc.) also have programmable buttons (as well as dials, drawbars and
so on), which mat either be programmable or could potentially be converted to
suitable commands for an attached sound generator using an interposed program.
